# Shell Something Out
## Displaying output in a terminal
The shell supports several methods and different formats for displaying text. A shell script typically begins with a shebang:`#!/bin/bash`.
### executing a script containing shebang
1. `bash myScript.sh`
2. Set the execution permission : `chmod 755 myScript.sh` and then `./myScript.sh`.
3. Alternatively, `chmod a+x sample.sh` makes a script executable by all users.
### Types of bash
1. *logging bash*: when using SSH or logging directly to terminal. will read `.bash_profile`.
2. *Terminal*: when you logged in and open a terminal. It will read `~/.bashrc`.
### printing in Terminal: `echo`
- `echo "character"` or `echo '<character>'` adds a new line at the end of every invocation.
- `""`: takes special characters and variable expansion. Escape special characters with `\`.
- `''`: does not support special characters and expansion.
- `echo -n "string"`: disable the new line
- `echo -e "1\t2\t3"`: e flag  enables interpretation of backslash escape `\`. here `\t` interpret to `tab`.
### printing using `printf`
- printf does not append a newline.
- We have to specify a newline when required
- The `%s, %c, %d, and %f` characters are *format substitution characters*
- The `%-5s` string defines a string substitution with left alignment (- represents left alignment) and a 5 character width. If - was not specified, the string would have been aligned to the right.
- The width specifies the number of characters reserved for the string.
- in the following example, For `Name`, the width reserved is 10. Hence, any name will reside within the 10-character width reserved for it and the rest of the line will be filled with spaces up to 10 characters total.
- `%-4.2f`:width is 4, and .2 specifies rounding off to two decimal places

```
#!/bin/bash
#Filename: printf.sh

printf  "%-5s %-10s %-4s\n" No Name  Mark
printf  "%-5s %-10s %-4.2f\n" 1 Sarath 80.3456
printf  "%-5s %-10s %-4.2f\n" 2 James 90.9989
printf  "%-5s %-10s %-4.2f\n" 3 Jeff 77.564
```

The formatted output is:

```
No    Name       Mark
1     Sarath     80.35
2     James      91.00
3     Jeff       77.56
```

## Using variables and environment variables
To see a list of environment variable `env` or `printenv`

### view the environment of other processes:
 `cat /proc/$PID/environ`. replace the PID with the integer. get the PID using `pgrep ProcccessName`. var=value pairs are separated by *null character* `\0`. To make the output human readable: `cat /proc/12501/environ | tr '\0' '\n'`.
### define variables
- An equal sign without spaces is an assignment operation: `varName=value`
- whereas using spaces creates an equality test `var = value`
- access the content of var: `echo ${var}` or `echo $var`
- using vars in echo: `fruit=apple; count=5; echo "We have $count ${fruit}(s)"`' We use ${} to tell shell that the var name is fruit not fruit(s).'
### define and export environment variable
We define env var and export it: `HTTP_PROXY=192.168.1.23:3128; export HTTP_PROXY`. The `export` command declares one or more variables that will be inherited by child tasks. After variables are exported, any application executed from the *current shell script*, receives this variable.
- Usually, `$PATH` is defined in `/etc/environment, /etc/profile or ~/.bashrc`.
- To prepend something to PATH: `export PATH="$PATH:/home/user/bin"` or `export PATH=/opt/myapp/bin:$PATH`
- to prepend `lib` folder of you new app: `export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/opt/myapp/lib;$LD_LIBRARY_PATH`
- or define this  function in `~/.bashrc`: `prepend() { [ -d "$2" ] && eval $1=\"$2':'\$$1\" && export $1; }` and  use it as: `prepend PATH /opt/myapp/bin`
### Get the length of a variable's value `${#var}`
`var=12345678901234567890$; length=${#var}` will print 20.

### Checking for super user
The `UID` environment variable holds the User ID. Use this value to check whether the current script is being run as a root user or regular user. The `UID` value for the root user is 0.

```Shell
If [ $UID -ne 0 ]; then
  echo Non root user. Please run as root.
else
  echo Root user
fi
```
## Math with the shell
The Bash shell performs basic arithmetic operations using the `let`, `(( ))`, and `[]` commands. The `expr` and `bc` utilities are used to perform advanced operations.
### Using `let`
Within a let command, we use variable names without the $ prefix.

```Shell
no1=4; no2=5
let result=no1+no2
echo $result

let no1++; let no+=6 # increment variable in place
let no1--; let no-=6   # decrement variable in place
```
### Using `[]`, `(())` or `expr` operator
These methods  work for integers only.

```Shell
no1=4; no2=5
result=$[ no1 + no2 ]
result=$[ $no1 + 5 ]
result=$(( no1 + 50 ))
result=`expr 3 + 4`
result=$(expr $no1 + 5)
 ```
### using `bc`
This is a more advanced function capable of performing operations on floating points.

```Shell
echo "4 * 0.56" | bc
2.24
no=54;
result=`echo "$no * 1.5" | bc`
echo $result
81.0
```

The bc application accepts prefixes to control the operation. These are separated from each other with a semicolon.
```Shell
echo "scale=2;22/7" | bc  #scale define decimal of output (3.14)
echo "sqrt(100)" | bc #Square root
echo "10^10" | bc #Square  |
```
## Playing with file descriptors and redirection
**File descriptors** are integers associated with an opened file or data stream that are 0, 1, and 2 associated with `stdin, stdout, stderr`
- stdout overwrite: `echo "This is a sample text 1" > temp.txt`
- stdout append: `echo "This is sample text 2" >> temp.txt`
- The return status is available in the special variable `$?`
- `2>`: redirect stderr & overwrite
- `2>>`: redirect stderr & append
- `2>&1` or `&>` stderr and stdout to a single file
- To send two copies of the input to stdout, use `-` for the filename argument:

  ```Shell
  echo who is this | tee -
  who is this
  who is this
  ```
- `/dev/stderr`, `/dev/stdin` and `/dev/stdout` may also be used.
- The `tee` command reads only from stdin:

  ```Shell
  command | tee FILE1 FILE2 | otherCommand
  echo A1 > a1; echo A2 > a2; echo A3 > a3;
  chmod 000 a1  #Deny all permissions
  cat a* | tee out.txt | cat -n  #-n: add row number; overwrite out.txt
  cat a* | tee -a out.txt | cat -n #append out.txt
  ```
### Custom file descriptors
A file descriptor is an abstract indicator for accessing a file. The exec command can create new file descriptors. We must create a new file descriptor (perhaps 4) with exec to read from another file or re-read from the first file.

```Shell
exec 3<input.txt  #open file for reading with descriptor 3
echo "this is first line" > input.txt
exec 3<input.txt
cat <&3

exec 5>>input.txt #create a file descriptor for writing (append mode)
echo appended line >&5  #writes to input.txt
cat input.txt
```

## Arrays and Associative arrays
Bash supports both **regular** arrays that use *integers* as the array index, and **associative arrays**, which use a *string* as the array index. Regular arrays should be used when the data is organized numerically, for example, a set of successive iterations. Associative arrays can be used when the data is organized by a string, for example, host names.

### Define Regular Arrays
 Values will be stored in consecutive locations starting from index 0.

 ```Shell
 array_var=(test1 test2 test3 test4)

 array_var[0]="test1"
 array_var[2]="test2"
 array_var[3]="test3"
```

### Print array's content

```Shell
echo ${array_var[0]}
test1

index=5
echo ${array_var[$index]}
test6

# Print all values in an array as a list:
echo ${array_var[*]}; echo ${array_var[@]}

# print all indexes of an array:
echo ${!array_var[*]}

# Print the length of an array:
echo ${#array_var[*]}
```

### Defining associative arrays
An associative array can use any text data as an array index.

```Shell
declare -A ass_array

# adding elements, method 1:
ass_array=([index1]=val1 [index2]=val2)

#adding element, method 2:
ass_array[index1]=val1
ass_array[index2]=val2

declare -A fruits_value
fruits_value=([apple]='100 dollars' [orange]='150 dollars')
echo "Apple costs ${fruits_value[apple]}"

# obtain the list of indexes
echo ${!array_var[*]}
```
## Aliases
use this command `echo 'alias cmd="command seq"' >> ~/.bashrc` to add an alias to the bashrc file. `alias example=` will unset the example alias. or remove the entry from bashrc. The aliased command should not be performed with root user especially in untrusted environments. The aliased commands may be escaped by `\command`. This will run the original system command.

## collecting and manipulating terminal settings
While writing command-line shell scripts, we often need to manipulate information about the current terminal, such as the number of columns, rows, cursor positions, masked password fields, and so on. The `tput` and `stty` commands are utilities used for terminal manipulations.

## Getting and setting dates and delays
Dates can be printed in a variety of formats. Internally, dates are stored as an integer number of seconds since 00:00:00 1970-01-01. This is called **epoch** or **Unix time**. Convert the two date strings to epoch and take the difference between the epoch values.

```Shell
date +%s #the epoch time
date --date "Wed mar 15 08:09:16 EDT 2017" +%s # convert a day to epoch time

date --date "Jan 20 2001" +%A  #output is "Saturday"

date "+%d %B %Y"  #20 May 2010
```
**Examples of formating options for date:**

Component  |  Format
--|--
Weekday  |  %a (Sat); %A (Saturday)
Month  |%b (Nov); %B (November)
Day | %d (31)
Second| %S

### Producing delays in a script
Producing time intervals is essential when writing monitoring scripts that execute in a loop. The `sleep` command will delay a script's execution period of time given in seconds.
The following script counts from 0 to 40 seconds using tput and sleep:We use tput sc to store the cursor position. On every loop execution, we write the new count in the terminal by restoring the cursor position using `tput rc`, and then clearing to the end of the line with `tputs ed`.

```Shell
#!/bin/bash
#Filename: sleep.sh
echo Count:
tput sc

# Loop for 40 seconds
for count in `seq 0 40`
do
  tput rc
  tput ed
  echo -n $count
  sleep 1
done
```
## Debugging the script: `set`
First methods: Bash's inbuilt debugging tools; Second method: write our scripts in such a manner that they become easy to debug.
1. `bash -x script.sh`: depugging for every source line
2. Debug only portions of the script with `set -x` and `set +x`. debug information for echo $i will only be printed. Alternatively, change shebang to `#!/bin/bash -xv`.
- `set -x`: This displays arguments and commands upon their execution
- `set +x`: This disables debugging
- `set -v`: This displays input when they are read
- `set +v`: This disables printing input
- `sh -x testScript.sh 2> debugout.txt`: writes debuging output to a file

  ```Shell
  #!/bin/bash
  #Filename: debug.sh
  for i in {1..6};
  do
      set -x
      echo $i
      set +x
  done
  echo "Script executed"
  ```
3. We need debugging information in our own format. We can define a _DEBUG environment variable to enable and disable debugging.

```Shell
#!/bin/bash
function DEBUG()
{
    [ "$_DEBUG" == "on" ] && $@ || :
}
for i in {1..10}
do
  DEBUG echo "I is $i"
done
```

Run the preceding script with debugging set to "on": `_DEBUG=on ./script.sh`. We prefix `DEBUG` before every statement where debug information is to be printed. If `_DEBUG=on` is not passed to the script, debug information will not be printed. In Bash, the command `:` tells the shell to do nothing.

## Functions and arguments
**Different ways of defining functions:**

```Shell
function fname()
{
    statements;
}

fname()
{
    statements;
}

fname() { statement; }
```
**A function is invoked using its name:**
Arguments passed to functions are accessed positionally, $1 is the first argument, $2 is the second.

```shell
fname ; # executes function
fname arg1 arg2 ; # passing args
```
**Accessing function arguments:**

```shell
fname()
{
   echo $1, $2; #Accessing arg1 and arg2
   echo "$@"; # Printing all arguments as list at once
   echo "$*"; # Similar to $@, but arguments taken as single
   entity
   return 0; # Return value
 }
```
Arguments passed to scripts can be accessed as $0 (the name of the script):
- `$1` is the first argument
- `$2` is the second argument
- `$n` is the nth argument
- `"$@"` expands as "$1" "$2" "$3" and so on
- `"$*"` expands as "$1c$2c$3", where c is the first character of IFS
- `"$@"` is used more often than $*, since the former provides all arguments as a single string

**Functions versus Aliases:**
In the aliases, the argument can only be appended to the end of whole command and therefore you can not pass the argument to the first command in an alias. When  `alias lsg='ls | grep'` and we run `lsg txt`, the txt is passed to the grep not ls command. But in a function we can use arguments everywhere is the function's body.

## The recursive function
